## “The State of the Syllabus” Roundtable
### MLA 2020 - January 9-12, 2020, Seattle, Washington  
### Roundtable Date/Time: January 9, 2020, 1:45-3pm in 607 (WSCC)
###Abstract

##A Syllabus is a Chance to Show Your Sources 
###Brian Croxall, Brigham Young University 

My first year after graduate school, I taught the survey of American literature. When we began studying realism, I wanted to connect the efforts of Henry James, Edith Wharton, and others to the photograph and phonograph—two technologies that made it possible to  reproduce things “as they really were.” Finishing my preparations, I found myself racing  through Wikipedia, reading articles about daguerrotypes, Kodak and Lumìere cameras, and the battle between wax cylinders and discs. I hurried to class and gave my lecture. But as I rattled off the different facts I had accumulated 5 minutes previously, I realized I was performing for my students a mastery of knowledge, something similar to what I had seen in lectures throughout my life. It looked like I knew everything about these inventions, but I had cobbled together this information and none of it was authentically mine. If this was not exactly a case of plagiarism—after all, I wasn’t publishing my lectures—it was certainly a case of imperfect intellectual honesty. 

With more reflection, I found myself wondering whether the difficulty our students occasionally have with citation can be traced to an instinct to act like their professors—who, in classes at least, almost never show their work. This pondering led to my making changes in many aspects of my teaching, but perhaps most clearly in my syllabi. Like most people I know, I developed courses by looking at those taught by friends and colleagues, but I presented the syllabus as an ex nihilo creation. To combat this, I began including a prominent section in each of my syllabi that explicitly named and then linked to those whose work had influenced the class I was about to teach. If for some a syllabus is a contract, for me it has become a chance to show your sources.

Bio: Brian Croxall is assistant research professor of digital humanities at Brigham Young University, where he designs and manages computational research projects and teaches courses in the digital humanities minor. He has a particular interest in the pedagogical methods that make use of and examine technology. Recent articles on that subject appear in the journal *Writing and Pedagogy* and the forthcoming volumes *Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities* (MLA) and *Hemingway in the Digital Age: Reflections on Teaching, Reading, and Understanding* (Kent State UP). He is the co-editor (with Diane Jakacki) of the forthcoming *Debates in Digital Humanities Pedagogy* (U of Minnesota P) and co-founder of the Pedagogy and Training special interest group in the international Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations. Other publications have appeared in, among others, *American Imago*, *Journal of Digital Humanities*, and *The Journal of Neo-Victorian Studies*. He is the co-editor (with Rachel A. Bowser) of *Like Clockwork: Steampunk Pasts, Presents, and Futures* (2016, U of Minnesota P).
