# Collaboration
Rebecca Davis, Matthew K. Gold, Katherine D. Harris, and Jentery Sayers 

## Curated Resources
* [2013-14 Praxis Program Charter](http://praxis.scholarslab.org/charter.html) (The Praxis Program, Scholars’ Lab, University of Virginia) [collaborative document]
* “Crowdsourcing History” (Jentery Sayers, University of Victoria) [assignment]
* Digital History Project (Wheaton College) [collaborative project]
* Digital Pedagogy (2012 Digital Humanities Summer Institute) [syllabus; collaborative project]
* DS106: Digital Storytelling (Jim Groom, University of Mary Washington) [syllabus]
* “How to Crowdsource Grading” (Cathy Davidson, HASTAC) [essay] 
* Hypertext and Electronic Literature (Jesse Stommel, Marylhurst University) [syllabus]
* Learning from YouTube (Alexandra Juhasz, The MIT Press) [collaborative project] 
* Looking for Whitman (New York City College of Technology, New York University, University of Mary Washington, and Rutgers University-Camden) [syllabus; collaborative project]
* “Occupy Class” (Pete Rorabaugh, Georgia State University) [collaborative project] 
* “Planning a Class with Backward Design” (Mark Sample, ProfHacker) [essay]
* “Process Checklist for Integrating Digital Humanities Projects into Courses” (Rebecca Frost Davis and Kathryn Tomasek, National Institute for Technology in Liberal Education) [essay]
* Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project (James N. Gregory, University of Washington) [collaborative project]
* “Teamwork VALUE Rubric” (Association of American Colleges and Universities) [teaching guidelines]
* “Timeline: Literary Historical Research” (Katherine D. Harris, San José State University) [assignment]

## Introduction to the Resources

To be sure, collaborative practices in higher education preceded the ubiquity of digital projects across undergraduate and graduate curricula. From that rich history, scholars have learned a few key things about collaboration, including—perhaps obviously—that it needs to be taught. Students do not enter the classroom knowing how to collaborate; it is a learned activity shaped by cultural and material conditions. And when it is not taught, it risks reinscribing social inequalities (e.g., gender inequity) and encouraging a lack of fairness (Chisholm 1990). As such, scholarly organizations and associations like the Association of American Colleges and Universities (AAC&U) have articulated guidelines for collaboration in academic learning contexts. The AAC&U’s “Teamwork VALUE Rubric” specifically notes that the quality of collaborative processes is irreducible to the quality of what they produce, meaning instructors should think carefully about how learners can document and make visible the iterative character of their work. Additionally, the rubric underscores the importance of integrating self-reflection into collaborative projects, encouraging team members to assess each other’s contributions, and acquiring feedback from outside observers.

With these principles of self-reflection, process documentation, and feedback in mind, contemporary digital pedagogies are best understood as developments of well-established pedagogical practices rather than revolutionary or reactionary formations. That is, they do not replace existing, “pre-digital” teaching strategies so much as extend, enrich, recontextualize, and complicate them. Here, Jesse Stommel’s syllabus for Hypertext and Electronic Literature is but one persuasive example. Many scholars of writing, rhetoric, and composition will observe that Stommel’s pedagogy is apparently informed by portfolio-based learning as well as writing across across the curriculum. For instance, the prompt for the mid-term self-evaluation reads in part as follows: “Write a short letter to me (the equivalent of about 1 page), an informal letter that responds to, discusses or questions your experience so far in the class. This is also a chance for you to write specifically about your work . . ., how you feel about your process, what you think of the final results, what is working, what still needs work, etc.” Later in the course, the students are asked to assess how they performed throughout the semester, state whether they met the learning outcomes, and provide the letter grade they would give themselves. This self-evaluation and attention to process seem essential to the course, especially since—for their final project—students have the freedom to compose whatever they choose through a digital or interactive medium. Importantly, however, collaboration is optional in Stommel’s course. But what if it were required? How would self-reflection and process documentation scale? How would learning behaviors, course outcomes, and assignments change? And how (if at all) would the lone-scholar model of humanities scholarship change along with them? 

In a moment of all things “big”—big data, big science, big humanities—these are the kinds of questions that digital pedagogies ask of collaboration. Echoing the recent work of Laura McGrath in “English Studies in the Digital Age: The Call to Collaborate,” we might say that “[w]orking together makes sense when it comes to research and teaching projects that involve digital texts, tools, and user practices because such work often calls for a variety of perspectives and technical proficiencies” (2). Of course, McGrath’s statement does not imply that working together necessarily involves a thousand-person team, petabytes of data, massive cyberinfrastructure, or a ten-year project. As demonstrated by various examples referenced below, digital pedagogy often thinks both short-term and small about collaboration: collaborations within a single class, collaborations in clusters of two or three people, or even “bloom and fade” collaborations. Nevertheless, when the legacy of scholarly communication is structured predominantly around the individual—the sole-authored article, the monograph, the lone instructor, the single mark for each student—then collaborating with anyone is scaling up. 

That said, the examples below exhibit digital pedagogy across scales of collaboration. Resonating with Raymond Williams’s emphasis on meanings over meaning, each defines collaboration differently, allowing readers to develop a rich sense of how collaboration can be taught, learned, and performed. And since The Digital Pedagogy Reader and Toolkit is anchored in the actual work and stuff of teaching and learning, I point audiences to a spectrum of informative materials, which act as exceptional examples for possible implementation, replication, and remixing elsewhere. These examples are organized into three overlapping yet distinct approaches to collaboration through digital pedagogy: 1) students contributing to an existing project, 2) students participating in crowdsourcing projects, and 3) students producing their own project.

## Students Contributing to an Existing Project 

Many digital projects have long shelf-lives and are arguably never done (Kirschenbaum 2009). They also involve a broad range of expertise and forms of contribution, from the highly technical to the highly theoretical, by everyone from undergraduates to full professors. As such, numerous practitioners of digital pedagogy have integrated existing research projects into their courses, where collaborations between students, instructors, and project team members blur the line between research, teaching, and even service. Collaborations of this sort are often steeped in project-based conventions, shared objectives, and large-scale communications. They especially help students learn about team dynamics and how to bridge offline interactions with online publications.  

To help scholars integrate projects into a given course, Rebecca Frost Davis and Kathryn Tomasek have produced a tremendously informative “Process Checklist for Integrating Digital Humanities Projects into Courses.” The “Logistics” section of this checklist is especially important for the course planning process because it stresses several aspects of course development that may go overlooked by many instructors. For instance, Davis and Tomasek remind readers to, whenever possible, prepare digital materials for student use, interpretation, and manipulation. This preparation may differ significantly from, say, creating a course reader or syllabus. And it can be a significant challenge, namely because—by the semester’s or quarter’s end—student contributions to an established digital project should meet the project’s publication standards. If, from the start of the course, students are not aware of these standards and do not commence work with properly-prepared materials, then they can easily become confused by or frustrated with the collaborative process. However, if they are intimately aware of these standards, then they can develop a strong awareness of how to work together to produce consistent content for a project, adhere to scholarly conventions (e.g., text encoding guidelines), and develop meaningful resonances across multiple contributions. As Davis and Tomasek also mention, partnerships with libraries are often key to collaborative, project-based courses. For instance, instructor and student contributions to the project can benefit immensely from a librarian’s expertise in metadata, preservation, and project management, giving everyone involved insight into long-term thinking about digital scholarly communication.  

Two persuasive examples of involving students in existing, collaborative research projects are Wheaton College’s Digital History Project and the Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project at the University of Washington. As Christopher Blackwell and Thomas R. Martin observe in “Technology, Collaboration, and Undergraduate Research,” projects such as these “guide student-writers into becoming student-authors,” allowing them to actively contribute to public projects through course-based collaborations (para. 56). More specifically, in undergraduate courses connected to Wheaton College’s Digital History project, students collaboratively transcribed and encoded pages from Laban Morey Wheaton’s daybook. This work allowed them to not only combine technical approaches with humanities methods; it also gave them the opportunity to collectively make historical materials discoverable on the web. Put this way, the work they would normally produce in isolation and submit only to their instructor became public, ideally increasing the perceived relevance or stakes of their contributions. Comparable to this project at Wheaton, many digital humanities projects leverage collaboration to bring attention to scholarly materials on the web. 

Additionally, as the Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project richly demonstrates, the integration of collaborative projects into undergraduate and graduate courses can stretch student inquiry beyond the time and space of a single quarter or semester. Students may become actively involved in a project team after a course concludes, or they may be especially motivated by the fact that their collaborative contributions “travel” beyond the classroom. Since the Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project acts as a platform for public education as well as social justice, it is invested in intersecting public humanities with digital humanities, specifically through its emphasis on publicly sharing underrepresented, ignored, and overlooked aspects of Seattle’s history (e.g., Communist civil rights, the Congress of Racial Equality, and the University of Washington’s Black Student Union).The public and collaborative elements of the project can give student-generated content a concrete sense of audience, rhetorical situation, and application. It can, in short, make writing matter. That said, in these highly collaborative situations, student contributions should be publicly recognized, much like they are on the Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project’s about page. It is also important for project members (instructors included) to respect student privacy by obtaining signed release forms (in advance) from all student contributors. Of course, these processes can be more than perfunctory matters of procedure. They can become “teachable moments,” helping students learn more about why documentation, transparency, and attribution matter for scholarly collaborations. 

## Students Participating in Crowdsourcing Projects 

When compared with collaborations that involve students in established research initiatives, “crowdsourcing” projects tend to require little to no infrastructure. They also lend themselves nicely to “bloom and fade” approaches to digital scholarly communication, meaning they are not necessarily invested in long-term development, preservation, or inquiry across multiple semesters or quarters. Instead, they give students a glimpse into how to collaborate with and through networked technologies, generally through low stakes assignments. Best understood as the accomplishment of a particular task by a distributed group of participants, crowdsourcing is a form of collaboration premised on collectively aggregating data. In many cases, participants are contiguous but not connected; they work together yet in an individuated fashion. Often, they do not even know each other.   

“Crowdsourcing History,” a prompt from one of my sound studies courses, walks students through a specific and admittedly contained (i.e., not public) approach to crowdsourcing. This particular assignment gave students the opportunity to survey the history of audio (using materials from across the web) and collectively create a SIMILE Exhibit of important resources for that history. The exhibit included names of key historical figures, dates, concepts, and technologies, which were represented by images on an interactive timeline. Produced between two class meetings, the exhibit preceded one of my in-class lectures on the genealogy of sound reproduction. However, prior to giving the lecture, I reviewed the exhibit and integrated stress points from the students’ interactive timeline into my lesson plan. The exhibit was then discussed, assessed, and revised by the students during a class meeting. This strategy not only allowed them to collaboratively create an exhibit. It also shaped how the class was taught. From the exhibit, I determined what students already knew about audio history and what was perhaps unfamiliar to them. The exhibit also revealed clusters of shared interests (e.g., Auto-Tune and DJ culture) within the class, and it became an internal resource for students throughout the quarter. However, it was never tied to an existing research initiative, and it was the focus of our collective attention for no more than a week. 

Ultimately, then, crowdsourcing teaches students how data aggregation—as one form of collaboration among many—relies on a sequence of highly structured activities. For instance, as readers will likely notice from the “Crowdsourcing History” prompt as well as Katherine D. Harris’s similar assignment on literary historical research, crowdsourcing almost always relies on people contributing to the same document (e.g., a spreadsheet in Google Docs), which then acts as a data source for graphical expression (e.g., a SIMILE Exhibit). Yet, in order to generate a meaningful expression, the data must be consistent across contributions. Using an entry form or a controlled vocabulary (e.g., a taxonomy for describing items in timeline) reduces redundancies, and many projects require a moderator, who will “clean” the data as it is entered. In the context of a course, this moderator can be the instructor or—better yet—a student or group of students invested in structuring and editing data. If something like a Google Spreadsheet is used to feed data to an expression, then it is also a fun and even playful activity for students to simultaneously edit a spreadsheet in the classroom. This way, they also gain experience in collaboratively composing documents in a shared environment. These forms of collaborative composition are growing increasingly common across the web, and at ProfHacker George Williams has provided some tips on “GoogleDocs and Collaboration in the Classroom.” 

As demonstrated by Hacking the Academy, Transcribe Bentham, and documentation for The Humanities And Technology Camp (THATCamp), crowdsourcing is also growing increasingly common in digital humanities projects. Cathy Davidson has explained ways to crowdsource grading, and the students and instructors of the “Digital Pedagogy” course at the 2012 Digital Humanities Summer Institute also crowdsourced a collection of teaching resources based on their seminar conversations and activities. These various projects demonstrate how—while dependent on voluntary contributions and highly structured activity—crowdsourcing is not inherently exploitative, especially in academic contexts. In fact, teaching crowdsourcing affords critical discussions about the ways in which digital technologies organize labor and how, when designed persuasively, that organization can foster creativity, critical inquiry, and innovative scholarship. When it does not go well, then crowdsourcing is also an opportunity to underscore how and why collaboration fails. For instance, in “Yes, But How Do You Teach Collaboration?” Rebecca Frost Davis writes: “As much as students may expect to work in teams after college, they should probably also expect to work on bad teams. Getting a little advance experience on how to handle malfunctioning team dynamics is not necessarily a bad thing.” In other words, collaborations do not always meet expectations, and reflecting on as well as documenting failure, surprises, and errors (especially in writing) encourages the self-reflexivity historically valued by humanities scholars.  

## Students Producing Their Own Project 

During the last few years, many digital pedagogy practitioners have approached collaboration by treating a given course as a project. Neither limited to a single prompt (e.g., crowdsourcing an exhibit) nor connected to a larger research initiative (e.g., the Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project), these courses give students opportunities to construct projects practically from scratch. Examples include the “Occupy Class” at Georgia State University and “Digital Storytelling” at the University of Mary Washington. The end product is often a web-based collection of short-form essays, curated resources, new media compositions, or co-authored narratives emerging from a focused line of inquiry. The collection may be open-access or behind a wall (e.g., a passcode-protected blog). And collaboration is typically anchored in sharing content with peers and encouraging what, in “Where Credit Is Due,” Bethany Nowviskie calls “a kind of perpetual peer review.” Assessment, self-reflexivity, and process documentation become components of the project’s everyday, with collaboration as the default mode of production.  

Here, “Learning from YouTube” is an especially thought-provoking and suggestive model for such perpetual peer review. First taught in 2007 by Alexandra Juhasz, the course took YouTube as its subject, problem, and medium. Students collaboratively generated a significant portion of the assignments as well as the course content. They also developed their own research topics (e.g., race, advertising, and art on YouTube), giving Juhasz frequent opportunities to learn from them. The course went through several more iterations before, in 2011, Juhasz published Learning from YouTube on The MIT Press, with programming and design support from Craig Dietrich. This “video book” contains content by a significant number of Juhasz’s students, and it affords rich insight into how a course became a project and then a book. While student-led, collaborative courses may initially appear like low-intensity efforts for instructors, they actually require a tremendous amount of framing, organizing, and facilitation, especially if the goal is to collaboratively publish a co-designed or co-authored text. That is, a state of perpetual peer review is not easily obtained in and beyond the classroom. It demands a unique combination of flexibility and structure.  

Consequently, project-based courses like “Learning from YouTube,” “Occupy Class,” and “Digital Storytelling” require adaptability in planning, and they benefit from what Mark Sample calls “backward design,” where—contrary to most course design principles—the desired results of a course are first expressed, example evidence of learning is then identified, and finally the learning is planned. Projects built by students also benefit from collaboratively produced charters, comparable to the one drafted by the Praxis Program in the Scholars’ Lab at the University of Virginia in 2012-13. By articulating shared values, goals, questions, and procedures, charters allow students who are working together to unpack, early in a course, the climate in which they to collaborate, not to mention the results they desire. Often, such climates include mechanisms (e.g., change logs) for regularly documenting contributions to the project, frequent presentations within and for the group, routine meetings or conversations with the instructor, shared spaces for saving and circulating materials (especially draft materials), and a means of visualizing or expressing the iterative development of the project (e.g., a timeline or version control system). With this intricate degree of planning in place, projects produced by students are more likely to be successful, and—comparable to Looking for Whitman, one of the most well-known and exciting collaborative pedagogy projects in digital studies—they are also more likely to expand into larger, more complex, more far-reaching initiatives.   

## Works Cited 

“2012-13 Praxis Program Charter.” The Praxis Program at the Scholars’ Lab. U of Virginia, 16 October 2012. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Blackwell, Christopher and Thomas R. Martin. “Technology, Collaboration, and Undergraduate Research.” Digital Humanities Quarterly 3.1 (2009): n. pag. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Chisholm, Richard M. “Coping with the Problems of Collaborative Writing.” Writing Across the Curriculum 2 (August 1990): 90-108. Print.  

Cohen, Dan and Tom Scheinfeldt, eds. Hacking the Academy: A Book Crowdsourced in One Week. Fairfax, VA: George Mason U, 2010. Web. 

Davidson, Cathy. “How to Crowdsource Grading.” HASTAC. Duke U, 26 July 2009. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Davis, Rebecca Frost and Kathryn Tomasek. ”Process Checklist for Integrating Digital Humanities Projects into Courses.” Rebecca Frost Davis: Liberal Education in a Networked World, 13 September 2012. Web. 3 December 2012.  

“Digital Pedagogy.” 2012 Digital Humanities Summer Institute. U of Victoria, June 2012. Web. 3 December 2012.  

“Exhibit.” SIMILE Widgets. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2009. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Gregory, James N., ed. Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project. U of Washington, n.d. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Groom, Jim. DS106: Digital Storytelling. U of Mary Washington, n.d. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Harris, Katherine D. “Timeline: Literary Historical Research.” San José State U, September 2009. Web. 3 December 2012.  

“How to Make an Exhibit from Data Fed Directly from a Google Spreadsheet.” SIMILE. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 19 July 2008. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Juhasz, Alexandra. Learning from YouTube. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011. Web. 

Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. “Done: Finishing Projects in the Digital Humanities.” Digital Humanities Quarterly 3.2 (2009): n. pag. Web. 3 December 2012.   

Looking for Whitman. New York City College of Technology, New York U, U of Mary Washington, and Rutgers U-Camden, n.d. Web. 3 December 2012.  

McGrath, Laura. “English Studies in the Digital Age: The Call to Collaborate.” Collaborative Approaches to the Digital in English Studies. Laura McGrath, ed. Logan, UT: Utah State U P, 2011. Web. 

Nowviskie, Bethany. “Where Credit Is Due.” Bethany Nowviskie, 31 May 2011. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Nowviskie, Bethany (nowviskie). “@triproftri Awesome! It’s a model I love (& grew up in: SpecLab was deliberately bloom-and-fade). Lots of @scholarslab initiatives are, too. 20 Mar. 2012, 10:52 a.m. Tweet.  

Occupy Class. Georgia State U, n.d. Web. 3 December 2012.

Sample, Mark. “Planning a Class with Backward Design.” ProfHacker. A Chronicle of Higher Education Blog, 31 May 2011. Web. 3 December 2012.   

Sayers, Jentery. “Crowdsourcing History.” Sound Reproduction Studies. U of Washington Bothell, October 2010. Web. 3 December 2012. 

Stommel, Jesse. Hypertext and Electronic Literature. Marylhurst U, n.d. Web. 3 December 2012.  3 December 2012.  

“Teamwork VALUE Rubric.” Association of American Colleges and Universities, n.d. Web. 3 December 2012. 3 December 2012.  

THATCamp. Google Drive, 10 July 2012. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Transcribe Bentham: A Participatory Initiative. University College London, 2011. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Wheaton College Digital History Project. Wheaton College, n.d. Web. 3 December 2012.  

Williams, George. “GoogleDocs and Collaboration in the Classroom.” ProfHacker. A Chronicle of Higher Education Blog, 14 June 2011. Web. 3 December 2012.   
